Add variable fonts article (migrated from WebFu) (#2844)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/variable-fonts/index.md

counterparts, can amount to 500k or more of data. This has been a sticking point
for web designers and developers, as a richer typographic experience comes
at a cost. This is even before we have dealt how the fonts are rendered, and the
fallback or delayed-loading patterns we are going to use (such as ["FOIT" and
"FOUT"](https://www.zachleat.com/web/fout-vs-foit/)).)

## Anatomy of a variable font

A variable font is a collection of master styles, with one central 'default'
master (usually the Regular font style) and multiple registered "axes" which
tie the central master to the other masters. For example, the **Weight** axis
might connect a Light style master to the default style and through to the Bold
style master. The individual styles that can be located along this axis are
called instances.

For example, the variable font [Amstelvar](https://github.com/TypeNetwork/Amstelvar)
has three masters for its **Weight** axis: The Regular master is at the center,
and two masters, thinner and bolder, are at the opposite ends of the axis.
Between these there are potentially 200 instances that can be chosen by the
designer or developer:

> <figure>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<figure class="w-figure">
```

Reviewer: Need to update throughout.

  <img src="Amstelvar-Alpha-example.png"
  alt="Example of the Weight Axes for the typeface Amstelvar">

>   <figcaption>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
```

Reviewer: Need to update throughout.

Author: Done

---
title: Introduction to variable fonts on the web

> subhead: We will look at what variable fonts are, how we can use them in our work.
> authors:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
subhead: TODO
description: TODO
authors:
```

  - mustafakurtuldu
  - thomassteiner
date: 2018-02-19
updated: 2020-05-12
hero: hero.jpg
tags:
  - blog
  - fonts
---

> In this article, we will look at what variable fonts are, how we can use them in
> our work, and the potential possibilities they entail. But to understand what
> they offer, first we must explore how typography and font loading currently
> work on the web.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TODO
```

## Introduction

The terms font and typeface are used interchangeably in the developer industry.
However there is a difference: A typeface includes an entire family of designs,
such as the [Roboto](https://fonts.google.com/specimen/Roboto) typeface.
Meanwhile a font is one of the digital files of that family, like "Roboto Bold"
or "Roboto Italic." In other words, a typeface is what you _see_, and the font is
what you _use_.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="robot-specimen.png" alt="A specimen of Roboto">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">

>     Roboto was designed and developed by Christian Robertson.
>     Depicted is a specimen of the Roboto typeface.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Examples of the Roboto typeface that was designed and developed
    Christian Robertson.
```

  </figcaption>
</figure>

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="roboto-family.png" alt="Different members of the Roboto family">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    Different fonts within the Roboto family.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

### Challenges for the Designer and Developer

When a graphic designer prepares their work, they typically export the final
artwork in a way that either embeds all of the fonts used, or they provide
an export archive that contains all of the assets used separately, a bit like a
basic website. The cost to the designer depends on the suitability of the
typeface for the rendering context  (is it legible at small sizes, for example)
and the license to use the fonts.

On the web, we have to consider both aspects, plus the associated bandwidth
costs. For every member of a typeface family used in our designs, we have had to
require another font file to be downloaded by our users before they can see that
text. Only including the Regular and Bold styles, plus their italic

> counterparts, can amount to 500k or more of data. This has been a sticking point

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
counterparts, can amount to 500&nbsp;KB or more of data. This has been a sticking point
```
https://developers.google.com/style/units-of-measure#spaces-in-units-of-measurement

for web designers and developers, as a richer typographic experience comes

> at a cost. This is even before we have dealt how the fonts are rendered, and the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
at a cost. This is even before we have dealt with how the fonts are rendered, and the
```

> fallback or delayed-loading patterns we are going to use (such as ["FOIT" and
> "FOUT"](https://www.zachleat.com/web/fout-vs-foit/)).)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
fallback or delayed-loading patterns we are going to use to prevent [FOIT and
FOUT](https://css-tricks.com/fout-foit-foft/).
```

## Anatomy of a variable font

> A variable font is a collection of master styles, with one central 'default'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A variable font is a collection of master styles, with one central "default"
```

---
title: Introduction to variable fonts on the web
subhead: A new font specification that can significantly reduce font file sizes
description: >
  How variable fonts work, how typographers implement variable fonts, and

>   how to work with variable fonts in CSS.

Reviewer 2: Updated the subhead and added a description to make the value proposition of variable fonts (VFs) clearer

Reviewer 3: works for me

authors:
  - mustafakurtuldu
  - thomassteiner
date: 2018-02-19
updated: 2020-05-12
hero: hero.jpg
tags:
  - blog
  - fonts
---

Variable fonts can significantly reduce the size of your font files and make
it possible to animate your font characters. This guide explains how
variable fonts work, how typographers implement variable fonts, and how

> to work with variable fonts in CSS.

Reviewer 2: Rewrote the intro paragraph to make the value proposition of VFs clearer

Reviewer 3: works for me : ), the images seem broken again though, was that what you meant by build not working?

## Browser compatibility {: #compatibility }

As of May 2020 variable fonts are supported in most browsers. See
[Can I use variable fonts?](https://caniuse.com/#feat=variable-fonts)

> and [Fallbacks](#fallbacks).

Reviewer 2: Moved the browser compatibility data to the top of the page and updated it (it previously said VFs weren't well-supported). We know from the MDN DNA results that cross-browser compatibility is web developers number 1 frustration. So we should provide that information upfront.

Reviewer 3: works for me

    Different fonts within the Roboto family.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

### Challenges for the Designer and Developer

When a graphic designer prepares their work, they typically export the final
artwork in a way that either embeds all of the fonts used, or they provide
an export archive that contains all of the assets used separately, a bit like a
basic website. The cost to the designer depends on the suitability of the
typeface for the rendering context  (is it legible at small sizes, for example)
and the license to use the fonts.

On the web, we have to consider both aspects, plus the associated bandwidth
costs. For every member of a typeface family used in our designs, we have had to
require another font file to be downloaded by our users before they can see that
text. Only including the Regular and Bold styles, plus their italic
counterparts, can amount to 500&nbsp;KB or more of data. This has been a sticking point
for web designers and developers, as a richer typographic experience comes
at a cost. This is even before we have dealt with how the fonts are rendered, and the
fallback or delayed-loading patterns we are going to use to prevent [FOIT and

> FOUT](https://css-tricks.com/fout-foit-foft/).

Reviewer 2: Changed this link to point to CSS Tricks. Zach's page is good but it has a political reference (Mitt Romney)

Reviewer 3: np/

Grade axis, you can avoid being forced to fiddle with changes to the Weight axis
that effects the overall width, and then changes to the Width axis that effect
the overall weight. This is possible because the Amstelvar default style has
been deconstructed in the 4 fundamental aspects of form: black or positive
shapes, white or negative shapes, and the X and Y dimensions. These 4 aspects
can be mixed to form the other styles, such as Width and Weight, in the way
that primary colors can be mixed to create any other color.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <video controls autoplay loop muted class="w-screenshot">
    <source src="https://storage.googleapis.com/web-dev-assets/variable-fonts/amstel-grade-e.mp4" 
            type="video/mp4">
  </video>
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    Grade axis being changed on the fly.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

<div class="glitch-embed-wrap" style="height: 480px; width: 100%;">
  <iframe
    src="https://glitch.com/embed/#!/embed/variable-font-experiments?previewSize=100&attributionHidden=true"
    alt="Variable fonts experiments on Glitch."
    style="height: 100%; width: 100%; border: 0;">
  </iframe>

> </div>

Reviewer 2: Embedded the Glitch into the page

Reviewer 3: Cant seem to see the glitch in the preview though

It's also possible to animate characters with variable fonts.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <video controls autoplay loop muted class="w-screenshot">
    <source src="https://storage.googleapis.com/web-dev-assets/variable-fonts/axis-praxis.mp4" 
            type="video/mp4">
  </video>
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    [An example of using different axes to animate characters](https://www.axis-praxis.org/specimens/zycon) 
    with the typeface Zycon. Zycon was designed for animation by David Berlow, type designer and
    typographer at Font Bureau.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

## Variable fonts performance gains {: #performance }

OpenType variable fonts allow us to store multiple variations of a type
family into a single font file. [Monotype](https://goo.gl/9gonHT)
ran an experiment by combining 12 input fonts to
generate eight weights, across three widths, across both the Italic and Roman
styles. Storing 48 individual fonts in a single variable font file meant a
**88% reduction in file size**.

On the flip side, if you are animating the font between settings, this may
cause the browser performance issues. Learn more about this in
the Supercharged episode on variable fonts.

> {% YouTube 'B42rUMdcB7c' %}

Reviewer 2: Embedded the YouTube

Reviewer 3: Works for me.
